Planning and executing a rocket launch is normally 
a slow process. An astronomically expensive and  

challenging logistical operation. However, last 
year the industry took a major leap forward. 

With only 24 hours notice from the United 
States Space Force, Firefly managed to  

integrate a payload to its Alpha rocket, plan its 
launch profile, get their rocket positioned and  

fueled on the launch pad, and finally launched. 
Shattering the previous 21 day record. [REF] 

All in an effort to carve out a niche for itself 
in the highly competitive space launch market,  

which is currently dominated by SpaceX.
SpaceX is launching more into space than any  

other company, thanks to reusable rockets driving 
down the price of launch, but that doesn’t mean  

there isn’t space for others in the market.
Being able to launch at a moment's notice is  

a really attractive capability. For a commercial 
company, say you have a satellite ready to launch  

that will generate a million dollars in 
revenue every month when it's in orbit, 

but the next available launch for a 
rideshare with SpaceX is 12 months away.  

That’s 12 million dollars of lost revenue.
That’s vastly more expensive than the cost  

of launch for most small to medium 
sized satellites. In a case like that,  

waiting for the cheaper launch price doesn’t make 
sense. The cost of opportunity is just too high. 

Then of course, there are the military 
applications, which is why the United States  

Space Force contracted Firefly for the Victus 
Nox mission. We don’t know what was on board  

that mission, but we do know why militaries are 
interested in getting things into space quickly. 

If an enemy destroys a satellite critical 
to your military operations, you want to  

replace it quickly. If a foreign military places 
a satellite or even a weapon into orbit, and you  

don’t know what it is, you want to be able to send 
something up to take a closer look, or if world  

war 3 has broken out, potentially destroy it.
Firefly has focused the engineering efforts  

of their Alpha Launch Vehicle with this valuable 
niche in mind, and have come up with some unique  

designs to put them ahead of the competition. To 
learn more I spoke with Alpha’s Chief Engineering,  

Jordi Garcia.
Brian 

One of the mission requirements was responsiveness 
and it's what we're talking about today is how  

you've designed the rocket around kind of things 
like the Victus Nox mission of just being able to  

launch within 24 hours. What engineering designs 
can you talk about that help towards that mission.

Jordi Garcia
Yeah, so when we  

conceived Alpha from the beginning, 
we're already targeting to go quick  

and be able to actually load the 
tank and fly as fast as possible.

So for example, some of the requirements 
is that you want to make sure that you can  

load your vehicle fast and detank 
your vehicle fast if you need to.

Let's say you have to scrub and go the next day, 
you want to make sure it doesn't take you 12,  

16 hours. So there's a lot of design decisions 
that you need to make from the beginning,  

making sure that your quick disconnect 
lines, your fill lines are sized,  

your vent lines in a way that you 
can fill. My target is 30 minutes.

When I started, it's like engineers, in 30 
minutes, I want a vehicle ready to go, right.

Unlike loaded, right.

Brian
And are there any difficulties  

around pump rates and volumes. Is 
there any hard limit you hit that,  

or is it you can just size 
the pump as big as you want.

Jordi Garcia
No, you can't because  

at the end what you want to 
get is the most mass to orbit.

So The problem is the bigger I make the lines 
and the quick disconnects and the valves,  

the heavier it gets. So it's a challenge. If 
I could load it in 18 hours, I could go very  

slowly and fill it up. Things would be lighter. 
But then you gotta make that trade.It's like,  

okay, I'm having lines and valves and 
components that I can take to orbit and  

not do too much performance, but still at the 
same time be able to fill and detank quickly.

It sounds silly, but one of the requirements that  

we have is like operators cannot 
work more than 12 hours a day.

So if we want to load, detank, go to sleep and 
then go again next day because you have a scrub  

when you've got to change something, we need 
to be able to squeeze all that timeline and  

make it in less than 12 hours to be able to 
get crew rest and then go again the next day.

Right, so it's something that, and 
still now we're still polishing,  

the more we load and detank and fly, 
we learn there's things we can improve.

So we have a lot of design changes coming up to,  

maybe not a lot, but we have some design 
changes to try to improve our timing.

Brian
And the  

temperatures of your fuel and 
oxygen are different, right.

Jordi Garcia
Correct. Yes,  

yes, yes. It's roughly minus 200 
and 90, minus 300F. That's one  

big difference that we have from SpaceX, 
for example, that we are not super cool.

We don't actually chill the liquid oxygen to get 
it even colder to get more performance, right.

We just get it up to the vehicle and we let it 
vent to a saturation and at those temperatures,  

well, at those pressures, you achieve 
the temperature that you want.

Brian
What are the pros and cons of that?

Jordi Garcia
The pros of that is that,  

let's say, if we want to hold 
and wait, you can hold and wait.

If you're super cool because you have 
to go through a liquid nitrogen system,  

you can load and then you have more 
performance. You can't remember how  

much. You've got an extra density 
from that, but you've got to go.

If you wait 30 minutes, 45 minutes, don't 
know exact timings, but something like that,  

then you have to detank and you have to scrub for 
the day. For us, as we wanted to make sure that if  

you had, I don't know, a ship or a delay for any 
reason, that you could still go in an hour or so.

We're taking that performance hit,  

but you're getting some more 
launch availability from that time.

So Firefly is balancing performance 
and launch availability. They have  

larger fuel and oxygen lines to allow 
them to fill their tanks quicker,  

but that means they carry more 
weight and lose some performance.

This compromise was also made when choosing 
propellant temperatures. SpaceX uses supercooled  

propellants to gain extra performance 
through increased density. SpaceX needs  

to save some fuel to land the first stage, 
so every bit of extra performance is vital.

Firefly has chosen to skip the super cooling 
step. This brings up an interesting logistic  

problem with the space industry. There 
are many reasons a launch may be scrubbed.

It’s not uncommon for a fishing vessel 
to stray into the exclusion zone while  

a rocket is being loaded with propellant. 
When this happens the launch has to be held  

until the boat is cleared, but time is very 
much of the essence, especially for SpaceX.

Their super cooled propellant 
can’t stay super cooled forever,  

so they start loading propellants 35 
minutes before liftoff. They call this  

a load and go. A delay, like a boat entering 
the exclusion zone, can be mission critical.

As the propellants begin to 
warm and lose performance,  

eventually enough performance is lost 
that they can no longer satisfy mission  

requirements and they need to drain the tanks 
and wait for another launch opportunity.

This delicate timing became an issue when they won 
the contract to launch the Crew Dragon to the ISS.  

This load and go method had never been done for 
a crewed launch before. The Space Shuttle loaded  

its propellant 7 hours before launch, which 
gave NASA plenty of time to find issues before  

the astronauts got onboard and they had concerns 
about SpaceX’s load and go method for crew safety.

In 2016, a Falcon 9 carrying a 2 billion 
dollar Facebook satellite blew up on the  

launch pad during propellant load. 
The metallic liner of the composite  

overwrapped pressure vessel had buckled, which 
led to the explosion. Had this been a crewed  

launch something much more valuable than 
a Facebook satellite would have been lost,  

but NASA eventually approved the load and 
go method after an extensive safety review.

While Firefly isn’t willingly waiting for 7 
hours, their warmer propellants can be continually  

topped off as they evaporate without losing any 
performance. This elongates their launch window.

We saw this in action with the first noise of 
summer launch attempt on July 1st. When ground  

equipment failed, the launch was aborted, 
but they simply reset the countdown timer  

and tried a second time shortly after, while 
topping up the propellants. Unfortunately  

they did not find a solution for the ground 
equipment before the launch window closed,  

but another opportunity was 
available the very next day. [REF]

There are other ways to minimize 
the chances of a scrub too,  

by reducing the complexity of the 
rocket and increasing reliability.  

The launch of Boeing’s Starliner on the Atlas 
5 rocket was scrubbed due to faulty valves.

These are natural issues to have, but 
being able to prototype and test new engine  

components quickly gives you a massive advantage 
in developing a simpler and more reliable rocket.

This is one of Firefly’s greatest advantages. 
It’s rare for space companies to have test  

stands close to not only their engineers, 
but their manufacturing facilities too.

SpaceX’s primary test site is here, in 
McGregor, Texas. While the majority of  

SpaceX’s engineering staff working on the 
Falcon 9 and Falcon Heavy are located in  

California. Blue Origin tests their engines 
at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center in  

Huntsville Alabama, while their engineering 
and manufacturing facilities are in Seattle,  

Washington. Having engineering, manufacturing 
and testing separated slows down development,  

and makes it harder for engineers to 
truly get a holistic view of their job.

Firefly’s Headquarters, Manufacturing 
and Testing Facilities are all  

located just north of Austin, Texas.
If you are interested in working with them,  

we have just updated our jobs board with 
all of their open positions. From HR,  

to machinists to launch engineers. You can 
see all their roles on startpropeller.com 

Firefly’s VP on Engineering had 11 different 
addresses over 9 years working at other new  

space companies. At Firefly she needs 1.
I joined her at one of their test stands

Brigette Oakes:
So my name is Brigette Oakes. I'm the  

vice president of engineering here. I've been with 
Firefly for five years. So we're actually on our  

test stand one site here. So we have six different 
test stands that test anything from components  

to full vehicle stages as well as composite 
structures. So this specific test stand is for  

our, is an engine test stand. So we've tested 
Reavers here, Lightnings here, Miranda's here,

and what I mean by those engines on 
the alpha vehicle the first stage is  

powered by four reaver engines this is a 
reaver engine and then the second stage  

is powered by a lightning engine a single 
lightning engine which we also test on this.

Brian:
And you're testing the  

engine here today. What are you testing, like 
what sort of results are you looking out for.

Bridget Oaks:
So this specifically is  

one of our development engines so we're probably 
we're testing every day whether it's this stand or  

another one this actually hot-fired yesterday 
and we swapped some components around. this  

development campaign. Two things we're looking for 
here is improved performance on the Reaver engine.  

So what we look for there is different designs 
on the injector to increase that mixing and that  

c-star efficiency. And then another thing that 
we're also looking at is improving our reliability  

on the main valves. So there's some unique 
differences to the LOX main valve on this engine.

Brian:

To get into specifics, the video that we're 
making is about the Victus NOx mission and  

how a big part of your focus here at Firefly 
is responsiveness, like quick turn over time.  

Is there any specific designs with your engines 
that are designed to help with responsiveness?

Bridget Oaks:
Yeah, absolutely. So  

I think our Alpha vehicle is actually very well 
suited to responsive space and that market.Most  

of that I think that we pride ourselves on is 
this tap-off engine cycle technology. So Firefly  

is the first company that's actually flown this 
engine cycle to orbit and successfully. So what I  

mean by tap-off engine cycle, there are a couple 
different open cycles that companies will use.

So GG or gas generator cycle is fairly common 
so that's what Merlin runs on. But and then  

there's also open expander and some other 
ones. Tap off specifically is unique when  

we compare it to the GG cycle because we 
don't actually have a separate combustor.

So GG cycle has its own gas generator that 
operates at a different mixture ratio to  

drive the turbine, so which drives the 
turbomachinery and the turbo pump that  

takes low pressure propellants to high 
pressure to combust in the chamber.

We don't have that second combustor. So 
what we actually do is we siphon off a  

portion of the gas inside the main chamber and 
that's what actually drives our turbo pump.

And why that's exciting is a GG could be, 
you know, on a scale of an engine this size,  

maybe an additional component here, uhm 
that's highly complex, has additional mass,  

we've essentially replaced that with this one and 
a half inch line down here. So this time, I mean,  

you can see that that's probably, 
you know, a couple pounds, maybe  

a foot long, and that replaces an entire 
separate combustor. So it pulls off the  

gas from this chamber up here and then 
drives that turbine right over here.

So it's more reliable. It's a tube and less 
mass. So that really helps us put us in a  

good spot for Responsive Space types of missions 
where they really care about that reliability.

Brian:
That must  

be difficult. It is so much simpler than 
having like the pre-burners and everything  

and having those additional parts.There's 
obviously engineering challenges that  

come with that or else everyone would be 
doing it or limitations. What are they?

Bridget Oaks:

So I think there's probably two that come to 
mind. One is it is a bootstrapped engine. What  

I mean by that is we have to get some amount 
of combustion going in the main chamber to then  

drive the turbine and get that going. So on the 
ground, we can do that differently than in flight.

And that startup sequence is pretty sensitive. So 
trying to figure that out. We were able to iterate  

on that pretty quickly to tune that in. But also, 
the thermal environment in the chamber, it's hot.

And so that, if you were to 
take that temperature gas  

its maximum in that chamber to drive the turbine.

The inconel and the materials that 
your machinery is inside of there,  

they melt. They don't, they're not 
sustainable. So we have to figure  

out a way to either cool that gas that comes 
out or find a cooler portion in that chamber  

to siphon off from. What some people 
have tried to do is let's inject fuel.

Usually when you inject fuel you can 
bring the temperature down a little bit,  

but that fuels and not combusted, so you're 
losing performance. We don't want to do that.

So we actually have a pintle injector design here.

Bridgette was on an absolute roll 
there, but I am going to pause to  

explain some things she mentioned in 
more detail, since not everyone in the  

audience are rocket experts. Namely 
around engine cycles and injectors.

As Bridgette explained, Firefly is the first  

company to successfully fly a 
tap off engine cycle to orbit.

A rocket's engine cycle is simply how 
it gets propellants from the fuel and  

oxidizer tank into the combustion chamber. At 
its simplest, this could be just pressure fed,  

where the fuels and oxidizer 
are held at high pressure,  

which forces them into the combustion 
chamber when valves are opened.

But this limits performance, we 
need to feed fuel and oxidizer at  

higher volumes and pressures to 
increase thrust and efficiency.

The gas generator cycle of SpaceX’s merlin engine 
partially burns the propellants in a separate  

combustor and feeds the exhaust gasses into a 
turbine, which spins and pumps the propellants.

However, this is wasteful as the 
products of that combustor are  

simply dumped overboard. Something SpaceX 
is fixing with Starship’s Raptor engine,  

which is a full-flow staged 
combustion engine cycle.

The Raptor engine runs ALL of its 
fuel and oxidizer through pre-burners. 

With the fuel turbopump running a fuel rich 
mixture and the liquid oxygen turbopump running  

an oxygen rich mixture. The excess fuel and 
oxygen from either side then combine in the  

combustion chamber in their gaseous 
state where combustion is completed.

This is a revolutionary 
engine. The first of its kind,  

but look at all the parts required 
to make that happen. Two sets of pre  

burners and turbo-pumps and all 
the plumbing that connects them

Firefly’s Reaver engine simply takes 
hot expanding gas directly from the  

combustion chamber and feeds it into 
a turbine to power the turbopump.

Bridgette explained that they found a cool spot 
in the combustion chamber to extract this gas  

from so the gas doesn’t melt the turbine, 
but she didn’t tell us where. However,  

we can make an educated guess based on 
what we know about pintle injectors.

Injectors are the part of a rocket 
engine that introduces and mixes  

the fuel and oxidizer in the combustion chamber
It’s not as simple as just spraying the fuel  

and oxidizer into the chamber and hoping for 
the best. We want to distribute the fuel and  

oxidizer steadily and evenly to maximize 
fuel efficiency and to avoid combustion  

instabilities. We also want to atomize the 
fuel into the tiniest droplets possible,  

to maximize surface area for combustion to occur.

Pintle injectors are much simpler and cheaper 
than the injectors used during the Saturn  

V program. The injector of the Saturn 
V was massive and it needed 2832 holes  

precisely machined into its face. 1428 
for the oxidizer and 1404 for the fuel,  

with each of them forming jets of oxidizer and 
fuel that collided to mix and atomize them.  

This was an expensive and complicated injector 
that was plagued by combustion instabilities.

Combustion instabilities in 
rocket engines are basically  

oscillations that increase in magnitude when heat  

released from combustion amplifies pressure 
waves and structural vibrations. Basically,  

the engine hits a harmonic and vibrates. This 
can affect performance, or destroy the engine  

completely, which happened to th e Saturn V’s 
F-1 engine during development multiple times.

These wedges on the injector plate were 
actually introduced to break up these  

waves and prevent the resonant pressure waves 
from building up and sustaining themselves.

This plate was heavy and expensive to manufacture. 
Now compare that to the pintle injector, used  

by Space X’s Merlin and Firefly’s Reaver engine, 
both need just one injector for the entire engine.

Pintle injectors have two concentric tubes that 
run the length of the injector. Generally the  

central tube contains the fuel and the outer tube 
contains the oxidiser. When the fuel reaches the  

end of the injector it meets the pintle, which is 
shaped to redirect the fuel 90 degrees outwards,  

where it collides with the oxidiser 
flowing perpendicular downwards. [REF]

This is a much simpler design, reducing 
complexity and cost of manufacturing,  

but the pintle injector has some added 
benefits for Firefly’s tap off engine cycle.

The pintle injectors geometry creates two zones 
of recirculation within the combustion chamber.  

A central propellant-rich zone that helps 
mix unburned fuel that would otherwise be  

spat straight out the nozzle throat and not 
contribute to thrust, and an outer propellant  

rich zone that can helps form a cooling 
filmaround the combustion chamber walls.

It’s here that Firefly taps off the combustion 
chamber gasses to run the turbopump.

A cooler region within the engine 
that won’t melt the turbine blades.  

This is an ingenious design that 
no other company has successfully  

flown to orbit. It removes an 
entire part from their engine.

This is an engineer's dream. Removing an 
entire component reduces weight, reduces cost,  

reduces manufacturing complexity, and one 
less part is one less part that can break.

However this is obviously easier 
said than done. Taking the gas  

to drive your turbopump directly from your 
combustion chamber comes with some issues.

Brian:
Yeah.  

I was going to ask of like taking the 
exhaust straight out of the combustion  

chamber if there's any issues with combustion 
instability of things moving around But you.

So yeah, combustion instabilities isn't 
something that we actually see on this.  

But that brings up a good point that, another 
issue that some people may have is because our  

fuel, RP-1 is actually a hydrocarbon. The 
byproduct of a fuel rich mixture ratio can  

lead to sooting or cooking, and because this 
line goes directly to that turbine wheel,  

you get deposits on there, which then degrades, 
which reduces the size of the orifices in there.

And degrade your actual performance during flight. 
So you may be at 45,000 pounds of thrust when you  

launch, but the longer you're flying, the more 
soot you're building up on that turbine inlet,  

which reduces your performance and, so 
there's also some really interesting  

proprietary technologies that we've 
developed and also patented that help us,  

not have that issue.
Brian: 

I know, I think I know the answer to this, but are 
you able to talk about the details of that at all?

Dr. Brigette Oakes
Not really. No.

Not being able to talk about things in detail 
is a pretty common issue on these shoots,  

but Firefly did take us on a 
tour of their tank manufacturing,  

and when I walked into their 
composite manufacturing facility,  

where they build the composite pressure 
vessels, I noticed something immediately.

They don’t use a metallic liner in their 
tank. You know the same kind of liner that  

buckled on that Falcon 9 and caused that 
2 billion dollar satellite to explode.

Firefly’s Alpha rocket is actually the largest all 
composite liquid oxygen rocket tank in the world

Now, I studied composites in my master’s thesis  

and I knew several people working 
on PhDs on exactly this subject.

Removing the liner has been 
the holy grail of composite  

overwrapped pressure vessels for 
quite some time. [REF] Linerless  

composite tanks weigh 20 percent less 
than traditional metal tanks. [REF]

However, while linerless liquid kerosene tanks 
are relatively easy, cryogenic tanks are much more  

difficult. Jordi took me on a tour of Firefly’s 
composite manufacturing facility to explain why.

Jordi
The liquid oxygen,  

that's when it became the real challenge. Why? 
And the reason is because when you go that cold,  

let's say roughly minus 300 Fahrenheit, it's 
very important that when you manufacture the  

carbon between the carbon and the resin, you 
don't have moisture getting into the system.

If you have moisture, you have 
cracks. When you go cryogenic,  

you're actually gonna actually have ingress 
of liquid nitrogen, for example, inside,  

or liquid oxygen inside, but then when it warms up 
by either external heat, or like actually, you're  

accelerating and getting heat, you actually have 
gasification, you go gas, and it will explode.

Like, that's where you crack. And to be honest,  

that was our biggest 
challenge for the first years. 

It's like, how the hell do we make the biggest 
liquid oxygen tank in the world that flies.

Right, and that's the one that 
we made. And to be honest,  

we broke a lot of tanks at the beginning 
and it took a lot of fine tuning. And I  

think now we have kind of a secret sauce on 
process, on control, on moisture, on humidity.

And then mostly, I think, is we have a very strong 
acceptance test plan and capabilities.In house,  

we take every single tank after we build 
it, and we think we have it now figured out,  

because we've flown already four, 
and we've built many of those.

We take it to the stand, we fill it with 
liquid nitrogen, and actually we load it with,  

first, the pressure, and second, the 
compressive load that it will see.

So when we fly, every time we fly, we know 
that every tank is good for those levels,  

because we have tested it at least 10% above 
the total structure load that it will see,  

as well as at the maximum and 
minimum pressures that it will see.

So that's how we like screen 
every single component.

And we wanna make sure that when 
we fly, there's no risk, right,  

that you make sure you've tested that unit to 
the levels that you will see while it flies.

Brian:
Is there some danger of crack propagation  

from testing it the first time and then like the 
second time you actually see the failure happen.

Jordi:
So what  

we've seen usually is like when you 
break it, you break it the first time.

Brian:
Okay.

Jordi:

Right, so if you test it, and again, 
because we tested at higher levels  

that it will see in its life.
So this thing, when it finishes,  

it's wrap up, That's for not this next 
flight, it's for one of the upcoming ones.

If it were to fail, it 
would fail here. After that,  

the pressures and loads that we'll see are lower. 

So we've seen that we have margin. As 
well as all these things are qualified,  

meaning that we took them to very aggressive 
levels at the beginning of the program.

And we proved that they would survive 
excess of those limits. So I think that's  

why we think it's beefy enough. And if you 
screen it and you ensure there's no cracks,  

there's no errors on that build, 
you should be with the fly.

Brian:

You talked a bit about like your secret sauce 
too, and it's obviously secret for a reason, but  

are you able to talk about any of the process of 
actually making a composite structure this large.

And obviously behind us is an even larger one.

Yeah, like how do you actually make a 
structure like this out of composites.

Jordi:

Well, first a lot of analysis and a lot  

of testing. And I think that's 
why Firefly we started small.

We started with alpha, just a ton vehicle. 
and then we're going out to a 13 ton.

I can't talk specifics 'cause we have also 
competitive vehicles that are trying to do  

the same thing, but it took a lot of time, a lot 
of analysis, and a lot of testing on exactly,  

there's like dozens and dozens of layers 
of different angles that you have to have.

So we had to correlate our analysis with 
like literally like how you lay it out,  

like you're seeing the carbon fiber 
here, there's different angles,  

different orientations, the way we do this, and 
then what things we put inside of it as well.

So to maintain not only pressurized 
and compression, but also shear load,  

that's one that's very tricky when 
you get bigger. That's why you can  

start small on composites, when 
you get bigger, it's a challenge.

That's why there's other launch 
vehicles that also use composites,  

but we're the only ones that we have this size 
right now for cryogenic tanks. And pressurized  

structures is a little bit easier 'cause you're 
not literally in contact with liquid nitrogen.

You don't get it to minus 300, right. And that's 
when on some conditions you get it, it's tough. 

And another one also, when you fly, you 
get hot, right. We get a lot of like,  

so that's why we also had to do a lot 
of analysis on like, okay, what's the  

maximum transition temperature that you have 
on your resin that you're gonna melt it, right.

'Cause metal is much easier, you can take 
it much hotter, but composite you can't.

Brian:

Are you able to talk about 
what resin you're using.

Jordi:
I cannot talk  

about the resin I'm using specifically, 
but I can tell you that for example,  

many rockets like us, we need to use 
cork to provide thermal insulation.

Quick interruption here. We will get back to 
Jordi talking about the cork insulation shortly,  

but since he couldn’t tell me what resin they are 
using I want to hazard a guess for myself, because  

I love material science and getting to deep dive 
into material specifications is something I miss.

In the space industry phenolic resins 
are pretty common for high temperature  

applications. The heat shield of the 
Perseverance rover was phenolic resin  

reinforced with carbon fiber. Phenolic has 
high temperature performance and it also  

ablates to carry excess heat away. Making 
it perfect for heat shields. This is too  

obvious an answer though, I don’t think Firefly 
would be secretive about using phenolic.[REF]

One interesting resin I found during my 
research, which I hadn’t come across before,  

was cyanate ester. It has a really high glass 
transition temperature of 300 degrees, which  

is better than phenolic, but what caught my 
attention was one key characteristic. It has lower  

moisture absorption tendancies than other resins. 
This is absolutely critical for a cryogenic tank,  

because as Jordi explained, if you have moisture, 
you have cracks, if you have cracks you have boom  

booms. Okay, I just thought that was interesting 
and wanted to interject, back to Jordi. [REF]

Jordi: 

I cannot talk about the resin I'm using 
specifically, but I can tell you that  

for example, many rockets like us, we need 
to use cork to provide thermal insulation.

And one thing that we do every time we fly, 
we actually have thermal couples here. We  

have thermal couples on our cork. We have 
thermal couples on different locations 'cause  

the more we fly, we try to understand 
how does the carbon behave when we fly.

And we always wanna make sure 
we have a certain margin.

- Okay.

Brian:
Are we able to show the cork.

Jordi:
- Yeah.

Brian:

We can cut and-

Beep - Intermission

This pause in programming is brought to you by 
International Trafficking of Arms regulations.

Jordi:
This is a very thin layer, but we  

have a thin layer of cork that we apply and that's 
mostly what we call TPS, thermal protection.

And we want to make sure that your carbon, again,  

this is an in-process work, but you don't want 
to get it too hot. And it's very thin, right.

But like this very simple cork, the same 
way that most rockets put on fairings,  

we also put on the primary structure 
to ensure that the composite survives.

My dream as a chief engineer is I want to get rid 
of all the cork. It takes a long time and it's  

heavy. I have like 700 pounds of like glue and 
cork and paint. I'd love to fly a naked rocket.

Brian:
Is cork  

a typical material to use in this application.

Jordi:
Yes, that most rocket companies use  

cork. It's the one that's very cheap and easy to 
implement and it provides your thermal insulation.

Brian:
Is it ablative of or is it literally just.

Jordi:
No, it provides  

your thermal gradient between your external 
temperature and your internal temperature. So,  

I can know here's my carbon and the resin 
that has a maximum temperature of X,  

can’t tell you what, because then 
you're going to know which one it is.

But then you have that specific thickness of 
cork, and it gives me a decrease of like 100F,  

for example, right, depending on 
the thickness. So we have a lot  

of analysis on that and that's why the 
first flight is always scary, right.

Because we have a lot of analysis that 
way. That's my temperature. That's my  

temperature. And then you fly, and then you 
have different temperatures on stage 2 Lox,  

stage 1, and then mostly the fairing.

The fairing is the one that gets hit 
the most. That's why the thickness  

of the cork is very thick, but 
on the tanks it's much thinner.

Brian:
And that's just aerodynamic heating on there.

Jordi:
Yes, aerodynamic  

heating that you have at different altitudes.

Brian:
Is the cork  

difficult to source? Isn't there like a cork 
shortage? Is this natural cork or is it synthetic?

Jordi:
Yeah, no, it's not so it's very easy  

to source like you can buy them like in sheets. 
It's really typical. Yeah, that's that's the thing  

is like if you want to be a startup and still keep 
it affordable. That's a very easy way to keep it  

like that. We're not reentering and reusing this 
right. You just want to make sure you have it.

Brian: 

I love that you're using like basically bark 
from a tree to. Isn't that what cork is?

Jordi:
Yes, that's it. That's it. That's from a tree.  

You get it. So kids use it for putting this stuff.
I just make sure the rocket doesn't burn.

Brian:
I was under the impression that  

there was a cork, like a natural cork shortage 
at the moment, but that's why I was asking.

Jordi:
It might, I'm not too familiar with it. I know  

that thrusting this is pretty straightforward. You 
can buy different thicknesses and it's cheap. The  

thing is, it's annoying to install, like it takes 
time. And if you want to increase production,  

that's one that we're trying to find ways to 
actually speed up the process. You know, you want  

to go to like six, twelve, twenty-four 
rockets, right. Laying this takes time.

So that leads into another interesting 
factor in the logistics of space flight,  

that Firefly are working to improve. 
How quickly they can build rockets.

The first generation of Alphas 
that Firefly built were hand  

made with the composite layups being 
placed manually. This is slow work. 

Firefly’s massive custom made automated filament 
winding machine builds their tanks by placing a  

continuously wound fiber around the diameter of 
their mandrel. Because the fiber is never broken,  

unlike the pre impregnated sheets used in 
hand lay up, the strength of the fiber is  

never broken. Allowing less material to 
be laid down, and it does it quicker.

Manufacturing optimization is going to be a 
key part of Firefly’s future. Being quick to  

integrate a payload and load fuel isn’t much use 
if you don't have any rockets available to launch.  

A huge part of the commercial interest in Firefly 
has been the notion of having rockets available at  

all times, but that’s easier said than done. There 
are thousands of little battles along the way.

Brian:

And to get to that point of actually having 
multiple rockets ready to go and being able  

to be responsive for a customer, obviously 
supply chain is going to be a big part of  

that and building rockets quickly. Part of 
that is vertical integration. How do you  

decide what to build yourself versus what 
you could just buy from another company.

Jordi Garcia:
That's a very good one. And I'd say  

this also came up from the inception of Firefly.
When we started, we looked at the complexity  

of a rocket and a vehicle and we saw, okay, 
components are very hard and they are really  

custom and like the soul of the vehicle.
And that's where we saw structures and  

engines. I know there's people that buy 
them from each other, but it's difficult.  

When you've got to put it together, there's always 
differences. That interface between the structure,  

the fluids, and the engine. So that's why 
we said, okay, let's bring that in-house.

And we focused on the first years at Firefly to 
actually develop that engine, that tap off engine  

that we are very proud of. The structures, that's 
the composite structure. It was also one that we  

wanted to get together and develop, because it's 
also like the primary structure of the vehicle.

But then there are also a lot of sub-components 
in there that you can't buy from the industry.

Maybe I won't go into specific components, 
but there's avionics components that are very  

good that you can buy from vendors, but they 
are very expensive. And then you think, OK,  

do I spend $2 million developing it to save 
50K per flight. Or do I buy the first ones.

And then there's like stage separation 
mechanisms. Do I develop my own. Or do  

I lower the risk buying one that's a 
little pricey. So I think the strategy  

that Firefly took was at the beginning 
is like, look at the complexity of the  

systems and which ones are off the shelf 
that you can buy that you can trust.

And that's where at the beginning,  

your first rocket's a little bit 
more expensive that you'd like.

But then the goal was to get to orbit,  

demonstrate the capability and start flying 
a little pricier than you like, per unit.

But then when you actually have 
an RE, non-recorder engineering,  

you get some money invested, and you 
say, OK, I'm going to tackle this one.

I'm going to tackle this one. 
I'm going to bring it in house.

What we have seen over the years is that 
it's hard to rely on vendors. Because again,  

we are not Boeing or Airbus that buys 
hundreds of thousands of components.

You buy little. And sometimes you have a failure. 
And then going there, I say, hey, why did that  

fail. It's like, oh, you're buying me 20 rockets. 
It's like, I don't have time to give you support.

And we don't know the design, so it's hard for us 
to understand. It's like, OK, why did that fail.

And what we've realized over the 
years that critical components that  

are a little more likely to fail, it's 
better for us to bring them in-house.

Because then when something fails,  

we have the engineers that know literally 
the printed boards that we designed. Why  

did that fail. We can actually go mess 
with it, learn it, like, oh, that's it.

Then we test it. We rebuild it in 48 hours. We fix 
it and put it on the rocket, and you can go again.

Brian:
Do you have  

any examples of that happening 
that you could talk about.

Jordi Garcia

Yes, so we had some components, I won't 
say specifically which vendor and what,  

but we had a specific component, 
actually that was for Victus Knox,  

that we had it on the vehicle, and 
it was a commercial off the shelf.

It had a flight heritage, 
and we had been using it,  

but we had an anomaly on the ground, and it 
failed. And then we tried to troubleshoot it,  

and we reached out to the vendor and said, 
hey, what's going on. Why did this fail?

What electronics. What's the 
problem? Oh, send it back,  

we will look into it. And then they said, oh, 
you just need to buy a new one. It's like,  

I can't. It's inside the rocket. It's like, 
I need to fix it. And it's like, oh, so yeah,  

OK, let's send it and we can put it in an 
engineer. It's like, no, you don't understand.

This is very important. We have a timeline. We 
need to go. And again, that was not the day off. 

It was like two months before. But 
then we were at the point is like,  

OK, we just can't depend on these 
guys to actually fix our problems.

We need to succeed on this mission. 
Right. So that's where we said, OK,  

enough. We had Blue Ghost, our 
lunar land that was on the site,  

developing its own internal 
component. It was pretty similar.

So we were like, OK, that's it. I put together 
a team. We were at the end, 91 people that took  

that specific component and we worked every day, 
every night for, no joke, 41 days, 91 people.

And what we did is like we actually took 
that blue ghost half design and we said,  

"This is flying in two months.”

And the response is, "Sorry, what. " 
Like I was supposed to have six months.

I said, "Ah, ah, two months and you're 
going and you're primary for this mission.”

So then we put a team together, we got 
a lot of engineers and I love to get  

a bunch of like young engineers that 
you're in charge of like the design,  

you're in charge of the testing and we 
had to not just slap it on and fly it.

That is like you have to qualify, test it, build 
several units, take it to thermo cycling, shake  

it, vibe it, shock it, right. And it's 
like make sure that this is not gonna fail.

So that's why we did that, and because in-house 
we can first make parts, we can make boxes,  

we have engineers to actually design boards. So 
we had the guys actually making the board, and  

we had a failure in the middle of the development 
that the thing, Christ, I was like a weekend off.

I took a weekend off with my family and driving 
up is like, it failed, "You kidding me." Redesign,  

right. And it was like, redesign on a Sunday, 
and Monday we actually had another one.

We got a new board, put it on, and did 
again the whole process. Like, when we  

told the space force that this failed, they were 
like, "Oh, my God, that's a eight-month delay.

" It's like, "Ah, hold my beer. " And it's 
like, "No, no, we're gonna do it. " So actually,  

we went crazy, we did it, and again, like, that 
was very exciting because the team took ownership.

And I think that's how Firefly was able 
to succeed. It's like, these guys knew  

that without them and without taking, like, 
ownership, they would not succeed, right.

And that's where, like, I honestly had, like, 
24-year-old guy is going at 5 am on Saturday,  

and it's like what are you doing, “can I go 
inside the rocket to check something out:

And I looked at it. It's like okay. Go for it 
right and they were testing things out and coming  

up with ideas. And then we brought that design and 
actually we qualified that design and we flew that  

design for For flight three right for our Victus 
Nox mission and then that was now it's what we fly  

for for now on for all the missions But that 
was a success story that like sometimes it's  

hard to depend on customers on on partners 
and it's better if you own it because then  

you can you can't fight your own battles.And 
to me, at the end, it's on your own destiny.

If something fails, you can make 
more. You can have it. You can fix it.

And you understand it. If you 
don't know what the box is made of,  

what the connection is, it's hard to troubleshoot.

This story again just highlights how important it 
is for Firefly to have all their facilities and  

staff working in close proximity to each other. 
It really allows them to quickly iterate and  

solve problems. This is a huge part of what helped 
Firefly break that 24 hour record. But, everything  

we have spoken about up to this point barely 
touches on what went on during those 24 hours.

When Firefly got their notice from 
the Space Force several things  

needed to happen. Just think about how 
complicated this is. They received the  

information on what orbit they were 
targeting with only 24 hours notice.

The guidance and navigation team needed 
to figure out the trajectory and test it  

using simulations on the ground. These 
simulations are actually run on the  

rocket. So all the relevant parts actually 
actuate, there just isn’t any propellant,  

the rocket is just being made to 
believe it’s flying by the computer.

Firefly had predicted the most 
likely orbits that the Space Force  

would want and had pre-run the simulations 
so that they could be prepared when the call  

came in. When the call came in they loaded this 
data and performed one of these dry run tests.

Firefly also needed to deal with all the 
bureaucracy associated with a launch. They  

needed to fill out paperwork for the FAA. 
Exclusion zones for the launch needed to  

be established and communicated to the 
relevant authorities. None of this could  

have been done without cooperation 
with the Space Force and the FAA.

This is just one step, but integrating 
the payload to the fairing and mating it  

to the rocket with only 24 hours was 
a whole other logistical challenge. 

Brian
And you spoke about payload integration too,  

that you've come up with some designs to make 
that quicker. Can you talk about that too?

Jordi Garcia
Yes, when we  

won that contract for Victus Nox and we 
engineering team got that, It's like,  

you're crazy. Like, we can't do 
that. Right. It's like 24 hours.

Like, we've got to-- and the goal 
was we had to-- we've got to call.

And then we had 24 hours to put the payload on the 
fairing, encapsulate the fAiring. And then-- and  

that's in a clean environment in a room. And then 
roll it out and mate it with the vehicle, lift it,  

and launch it in 24 hours. And the key was that 
we had a window of like three minutes, I think,  

that we had to hit. Because the idea was like, 
you had to end up in a specific place in space.

So it had to be depending on what time of the 
day we had. So for example, design decisions  

is when we first got it, we said we can't do 
it. So we had to design hardware around it.

So we had to design what we call ground support 
equipment that actually held the fairing,  

helped the path, and allowed us to first 
load and then rotate, do the final checkouts,  

and actually hold the fairings, put 
them on and mate on that configuration.

And then once we had what we call the 
payload-based assembly and the two  

fairings closed out, we to then create also 
what we call an environmental control system.

You need to make sure that your satellite 
is always first absolutely clean. You don't  

want to have optics that get dirty 
with dust or you don't have moisture.

Let's say you have cameras on your 
system or star trackers.If you have  

moisture on a system above 60%, you're 
down for the day. You can't launch.

So we had to develop ground-side systems 
that could actually go and pump heat and  

cold depending on the day and then control 
moisture, which in Vandenberg to be honest  

was a challenge because we had not done that. 
And again, like, developed that from scratch.

Like, we had the engineers going crazy on it. 
So we did that, and we did lots of testing. 

And then we had to go and mate. And the thing 
is, we had never mated before on the pad.

We usually, like others do, you actually 
mate on your horizontal integration  

facility. That's how we did flight one 
and flight two. So you had to just go,  

put the payload on, mate, and 
then go out, and then launch.

But when you install your vehicle and you do the 
whole static fire, meaning we fully loaded them,  

we simulated everything, it's good, you have 
to take it out again and install the payload  

and go back in, you waste two weeks because 
there's 30 or so fluid connections that you  

need to reconnect and check and it's not 
just, you know, ambient helium, right.

You're talking of cryogenic helium, cryogenic 
liquid oxygen for stage one and stage two,  

so all of that needs to be rechecked.

So we have to develop a system to outside,  

even in rainy day and windy day, that we 
had a way to actually go in there and mate.

And to be honest, it was a challenge.

We had to, we made it here six times before and 
we were like literally timing, counting bolts.

We got to the point that we had to slightly 
chamfer the bolts to help us go faster on  

entering because you have like 120 
bolts that you need to go in, right.

And then, and people had like, 
you had 20 minutes, right.

And the technician's like, 
"Are you kidding me." Right.

So they were all like, "Go in.

" It's like, "No." So, adjusted, then 
you, like, it's still a big rocket.

So you have to like adjust the going in and 
make sure that all of those were lined up.

And then you got to go carefully 
putting the fasteners as well,  

because you're going to a composite structure. 
So we don't have like inserts inside.

So like, you got to be careful because if you go 
too fast, you break them and you pop them out,  

right. And then we also had to make calculations 
of how many bolts could we miss in case like  

some were actually losing the threads or even 
failing because you can't go correct for that.

So we had to do a lot of analysis on 
that and prove what was good. But yeah,  

that was a real challenge 
and the teams did amazing.

Brian

Almost sounds like you'd need to consult 
with like an F1 pit crew team to find out.

Jordi Garcia
Yeah, no joke, but  

we have some F1 guys here. Yeah, from Europe and 
from here because it's that sort of level. F20,  

I consulted for Ferrari many years ago in Italy. 
Yeah, and it's kind of the same mindset. Ferrari,  

every 10 milliseconds of savings 
for a lap, you got to go implement.

We had the same thing. Every five, 
15 minutes you could do in safe time,  

you could go implement. And what we did good, 
I think, is we worked with technicians and  

the integration engineers and the design 
engineers, OK, where can you save time.

So we would do one attempt, and everybody 
would take no. Hey, I can save five minutes.

I can save 15 doing this.If you change that, we 
can actually do it. We spent like five months or  

so trying things out on how to save time. The 
beauty now is that after we've done it once,  

we realized that we can do better. The fun thing 
is that we did it and for us, damn, we made it.

To be honest, it was crazy. We didn't think the 
previous record was 21 days. This is the time 24  

was crazy. I'm sure the space was also 
crazy, but the challenge was there.

Once we hit it, I go down, "Congratulations 
everybody." I say, "Great job, guys.Great  

job.It was awesome. " Then the tech is 
like, "Man, I think we can shave two hours."

Stop it, you know, but they're also 
excited and that's actually for every  

flight flight for we didn't prove mental And it  

is to shave it right because there's 
a lot of customers and governments.

They're asking for that Hey, can 
you respond quickly and go up there.

Firefly has achieved a lot, but still has a lot to  

prove. Since filming these interviews 
they successfully launched to orbit a  

second time with the Noise of Summer. They 
are also working on their lunar lander for  

an upcoming moon landing attempt with 
the Blue Ghost mission later this year.

The Alpha rocket is a small rocket capable of 
carrying 1030 kilograms to low earth orbit.  

For firefly to gain more market share in the 
highly competitive space launch market they  

need to develop heavier lift rockets. They are 
currently developing a medium lift rocket in  

partnership with Northrop Grumman, which is 
being designed to carry 16,300 kilograms to  

low earth orbit. A major step up from Alpha, 
but still using that tap off engine cycle for  

their larger Miranda engines. The first flight 
of this medium launch vehicle is slated for 2025.

The space industry is so competitive, when 
placing my bets on which companies will be  

successful I usually look first to the talent in 
their engineering departments. I was incredibly  

impressed by both Brigette Oakes and Jordi 
Garcia, and I wished I could have included  

more of their interviews in this video. It 
always feels wasteful to leave the knowledge  

they share on the cutting room floor, so 
I have uploaded their full interviews on  

Nebula for everyone interested to hear 
it. Combined, their extended interviews  

are nearly 2 hours long and are a master class 
in small rocket design for any aspiring rocket  

engineers or just rocket enthusiasts that 
want to learn more about the space industry.

Before I go into an entire spiel about how 
great Nebula is. I know many of you are sick  

of signing up for yet another subscription 
service. So, if you simply want to support  

our channel and get lifelong access to all of 
Nebula’s exclusive programming, we are offering  

lifetime memberships for a limited time for 300 
hundred dollars. Unlike other subscriptions,  

you can buy once and never pay again.
This helps us fund Original programming  

like our 5 part Battle of Britain series where 
we recreated the central command room of the  

Battle of Britain to show in intricate detail 
how Britain won their most impactful victory.  

We show you how incoming raids were plotted on 
the huge central map with color coded tiles and  

how the commander kept track of what squadrons 
were available using a light up board mounted  

on the walls. We spent over a month recreating 
this room using archived footage and photos,  

an investment of time for a single animation 
asset that we simply can’t afford on YouTube. 

For less than the price of a cup of 
coffee per month, you can get access  

to all of Nebula’s Originals, along with our 
entire catalog without any ads. You can also  

easily download videos to watch on the go.
This channel depends on the funding Nebula  

provides us. If you have been subscribed 
to this channel for more than 3 years,  

you have seen the huge increases in production 
quality that Nebula has facilitated. Growing  

from 2D animations that myself and Mike taught 
ourselves how to do, to having a full team of  

incredibly talented 3D artists that rival any TV 
production. This is expensive work and we would  

love to grow our team even more, something 
we can only do with your support as YouTube  

ad revenue simply does not cover the bulls. Last 
year we made a financial loss for 3 months in a  

row. YouTube is simply a volatile platform where 
we depend on the whims of advertisers. Nebula is  

our life raft in a volatile sea of social media.
This is a common theme across YouTube creators.  

Nebula’s goal is to enable and level up our 
entire roster of creators. To remove the financial  

uncertainty that forces us to rush projects. To 
remove the algorithms that force us to analyze  

data points instead of what really matters, 
the audience on the other side of the screen.

So if you want to check out all of the 
fascinating exclusive content on Nebula,  

go to nebula.tv/realengineering or click the  

link in the description to get 40% 
off our yearly subscription today


